What is a tree well a tree is a hierarchical data structure.
So here is a visual representation of a tree.
And we're going to go over some basic terminology in this video.
Every circle in this tree is called a node.
And so this is a node.
This is a node.
This is a node nodes can have children.
And so we'll see here that the node with the value 15 has three children 22 4 and 17.
Now each node can have one and only one parent.
And so 22:8 parent has 15 18 parent is four.
You'll notice that no nodes have two incoming arrows.
We can have four pointing to nine and 22 pointing to nine because that would mean that 9 has more than
one parent and that's not allowed.
So when a tree every node has one and only one parent.
Now there's a special note in every tree called the root and the root of this tree is the note that
has value 15 the root no does not have a parent and every tree can have one and only one root node.
And so when this tree as I said the root node is 15.
And this is how trees are usually visually represented.
Now you might be looking at this and wondering about the practical applications.
Well trees are ideal when things can contain other things or when things can descend from other things.
So for example here 22 is a descendent of 15 right because 15 is a parent of 20 to 19 descends from
22 because 22 is the parent of 19.
So when you have a situation where items can contain other items or there's a hierarchical relationship
such that items can descend from other items.
Trees are a good data structure to use in a couple of examples would be the Java class hierarchy that's
a tree because a class can extend only one other class meaning that each class can have only one parent
but you can have multiple classes extending the same class so a class can have many children because
when it comes to trees that you can have as many children as you want you can only have one parent but
you can have as many children as you want so if you wanted the node four to have 50 children that's
allowed.
And getting back to the Java class hierarchy it only has one root.
And can you guess what the root is.
While it's the Object class.
Right because every class in the JDK ultimately descends from object.
Now another application of trees would be the file system on your hard drive.
Every folder can have children and those children would be folders or files a folder or a file can only
belong to one folder so it can only have one parent and if you're wondering about the route while a
file system could have multiple routes in the sense then it can have multiple drives but each drive
is a tree.
And so the root of the C-Drive drive would be the C directory the top most directory.
So as I just said in a tree every item in the tree is a node the node at the top of the tree is the
root and every tree has one and only one root every non-root node has one and only one parent a leaf
node has no children.
So if we go back out to our tree here 19 9 18 3 11 and 0 are all leaf nodes because they don't have
any children.
And if you have a tree with only one node in it it's called a singleton tree and of course in that case
the the only node would be the route because every tree has to have a root.
And so here is our root node in this tree.
0 is a leaf that has no children.
The same is true of 11 14 18 7 25 and 19.
And each of these arrows is called an edge.
And so there's an edge going from 15 to 22 there's an edge going from 15 to 4 and the arrow always points
from the parent to the child.
Now a few more terms every tree consists of one or more subtrees.
And for centuries you can start at any given node.
So let's say we start at node 17 node 17th century consists of 17 11 and 0 so a subtree is if you start
at any given node it's the node and all of its descendants.
And so if we want it to start at node 4 the subtree for node 4 would be this entire thing it would be
4 9 18 and 3 25 7 and 14 because if you follow the edges from 4 you can get to all of those nodes.
And so I said tree consists of a note you can start at any node in the tree and all of its descendants
and the descendants or all the nodes you can get to by following the edges downward cause we're talking
about descendants and so if we start at four we can't get to 22 because we have to go up to our parent
and when it comes to subtrees when you start at a given node you're only interested in all of the Descendants.
And so to figure out a subtree of a node is started the node and you include all of the nodes that you
can get to through the ages for 17 that would be 17 11 and 0 and of course for 15 it would be the entire
tree.
Now the tree for nine if we want to start there is nine twenty five and seven.
So it's it's the subtree here.
A path is a sequence of notes required to go from one note to another.
For example the path between nodes 4 and 25 are 4 9 and 25.
So the path from the root to node 14 is 15 for 3 and 14.
Now one important characteristic of trees is that you can't have cyclic paths.
And so we can have a path that crosses a node more than once.
And so we couldn't have a path that would go 15 for 9 18:4 and off somewhere else.
So you're not allowed to have cycles in your paths.
That's the defining characteristic of a tree a root path is the path and going in the other direction
is how to get from a node to the root so the root path for three would be three four and 15.
Now the depth of a node is the number of edges from the node to the root.
And so the root will always have a depth of 0 because there are no edges on the path from the root to
the root.
Obviously if we look at 14 that would have a depth of 3 because as we just said The path is 14 3 4 and
15.
And so there are three edges in the path from 14 to the root and so 14 has a depth of 3.
18 would have a depth of 2.
So the depth for 18 would be two we have to go through two edges to get to 18.
The height of a node is the number of edges on the longest path from the node to a leaf.
And so if we look at for here will see that the height of four is two.
It can get to 18 in one edge.
Thats not the longest path because it takes two edges to get to 25 and 7 and 14 and so the height of
4 is 2 because the number of edges on the longest path from the note to Alif is 2.
So the height of 4 is 2.
Now leaf nodes will have a height of zero right because if the height of a node is the number of edges
on the longest path from the note to a leaf well leaf nodes were already there the number of edges on
the path to get from a leaf node to a leaf node is 0 and so leaf nodes always have a height of 0.
Now the height of a tree is the height of its root node in this tree the longest path from the root
to a leaf is three because its these leaves down here that take three edges.
And so the height of the root is three and that means the height of the tree is three because in this
tree the largest height will be the longest path from the root to eight lymph node.
So once again the depth of a node is the number of edges from the node to the trees root node.
So when we're figuring out depths we start at the node and we work up to the root and we say how many
edges does it take me to get up to the root.
That's a deps.
But when we're talking about height we're going the other way we're looking at what's the longest path
from the node and it doesn't have to be the route down to a leaf.
And so when we're talking about depth we calculate that by moving up the tree and counting the number
of edges to the root.
And when we're talking about height we start at the No.
So if we're trying to figure out the height for note 22 we start there and say What's the longest path
to a leaf.
Well there's only one leaf and we figured that out by counting the number of edges is 1 and so 22 has
a height of 1.
Now you'll notice it's sibling 4 has a height of 2 and so nodes that are on the same level don't necessarily
have the same height and the height of the root is the height of the entire tree because obviously the
longest path from the root to a leaf node is going to be the height of the root and that's going to
be the height of the tree.
Now a level of a tree contains all the notes that are out the same depth so the root is at level 0 because
it has a depth of 0 22 4 and 17 are at level 1 because they have a depth of 1.
All the nodes along here are at level 2.
So 99 18:3 11 and 0 are all at level 2 because they have a depth of two.
We have to travel along to edges to get to them.
And these three leaf nodes at the bottom are at a depth of three because we have to travel along three
just to get to them and so they're at level three.
So the roots at level 0 it's immediate children are at level 1.
The grandchildren of the route are at level 2 and the great grandchildren of the route are at level
three.
So we've talked about how the children are descendants of course notes also have ancestors.
So one of the ancestors of four while the only ancestor for is 15 we say that a node is an ancestor
of another node.
If it's in the nodes path which makes sense.
So three has two ancestors four and 15 because we have to pass through 15 and four to get to three.
So a node can have multiple ancestors and basically its ancestors are all the notes on the path from
the root to that node.
And so now that we've looked at General trees we're going to move on and look at binary search trees.
And so let's move on to the next video.
I'll see you there.